---
title: Pair Programming Should Not Be the Default
author: Matt
date: 2014-01-12
template: article.jade
---
For about the past 3 years, I have almost exclusively pair programmed at my job.
I have paired with many people in many situations and learned a lot about this
practice. I have found pairing can be effective, but it can also be highly
ineffective and costly.  When adding pairing to your organization, I definitely
believe it should not be the "default". It's important to see pairing as another
tool, and only employ it when beneficial.

<span class="more"></span>

##If You're Going to Start Pairing...

Before I really begin, I want to point out it's important to create a proper
pairing environment. Sticking two people at one desk with a laptop won't cut it.
Start with two desks, arranged at 90 degrees. One computer feeds two monitors
(or four), two keyboards and two mice. 

[[[[pairing illustration]]]]

This gives each participant their own notion of space, sets them up as equals
(as far as the environment is concerned), and removes all environmental
roadblocks to the developers participating. If you only have one keyboard,
you'll probably find one person not contributing as much, as they may see that
getting the keyboard may require more energy than what they want to contribute
at that moment, so that small (but likely valuable) contribution might never
come to be.

That might sound ridiculous, but it all depends on the person's personality. And
personality is a huge factor in whether pairing is effective or not.

##When Pairing Rocks

Knowledge transfer. This is pairing's killer feature. I've also found it's
often the only benefit you get from pairing.  
  
When one person knows the subject matter well and the other doesn't, then
pairing can be *highly* effective. I have found this to almost always be the case,
regardless of personalities involved or what knowledge is being transfered. This
is the one case where the benefits of pairing transcend everything else and it's
so totally worth it.

The knowledge transfer isn't necessarily the main focus of the pairing session.
Small things like new key commands also get transfered quite effectively.
Sometimes these small knowledge transfers are also worth it. I find I can enjoy
pairing with someone new -- even if the actual task at hand is not ideal for pairing --
just to get added exposure to tools, resources, tricks, tips, etc. These tidbits
can save seconds off your workflow, and that adds up. Especially when all the
tips your team collectively knows are spread out to everyone.

### And ... When the Pair Gels

This is the other circumstance I have found where pairing is highly effective.
When the two members gel well. Their personalities slide together just right,
and the end result is a super-being that is more than the sum of its parts.
Sometimes way more. 

When this happens, it almost doesn't matter what they are working on, they tend
to do it very well. This is another situation when most of the drawbacks of pairing
fade away.

This mythical super-being is usually what companies are after when they start
adding pairing to the mix. This is also what Extreme Programming and all the
books on pairing tend to tout. It can happen, I've seen it, but it's rare.

##That Super-Being Really is Mythical Most of the Time

And here comes my first problem with pairing. Throwing two random people
together and expecting magic is pretty ridiculous. We see this all the time in
the real world. A star studded cast seems to have little bearing on whether a
movie will be good or not. Baseball's all-star game rarely leads to two
unstoppable teams. Two bands collaborating rarely creates music better than each
band's individual efforts. More is not necessarily better, and collaboration is
tricky.

> Stop with the incessant group work. Just stop it! -- [Susan
> Cain](http://www.ted.com/talks/susan_cain_the_power_of_introverts.html)

##Exploring the Unknown and Solving Hard Problems

Tough problems are also where companies might gravitate towards pairing. Surely
if one smart person can solve a difficult problem, two can solve it faster and
better? No. Really, strongly, *no*. This is such a fallacy.

My own experiences support this strongly. I can't think of a single time I've
made a great breakthrough while pairing. Yet I can point to numerous times when
the breakthroughs happen once the pair disperses. One person has to go to the
dentist, or the other had to work from home that day. These are the moments when
the hard problems suddenly make leaps toward being solved.

I don't want to have to constantly explain everything I'm thinking about when
digging into hard problems. It slows me down and prevents me from getting into
the zone. The zone is where deep thought really comes from and where
breakthroughs happen. I want to feel free to try something silly or even stupid
if I think it might increase my knowledge about the problem, without first
having to justify why I'm doing it. And vice versa with the person I'm working
with, I want them to get into the zone too.

I'm not at all saying collaboration is bad. Collaboration is great! But *pairing
is not necessarily collaboration*. Led Zeppelin collaborated together, yet Jimmy
Page didn't have a second guitarist weighing in on every single chord being
chosen. This is extremely important. There are no silver bullets out there. No
magic formulas that suddenly increase a team's productivity. Pairing is not a
panecea for collaboration. 

###Research is With Me Too

Recent research supports these ideas. Susan Cain and her book
[Quiet](http://www.thepowerofintroverts.com/) are the most recent vehicle to
bring this to light. 

[[[[get out Susan's research here]]]]

##But ... You're Obviously an Introvert
Yup, I'm totally an introvert. For sure, my disposition makes me more critical
of pairing. My obvious love of Susan Cain's work should be pretty palpable too.

Roughly a third of the population is introverted, and there is no correlation between
introversion/extroversion and intelligence. These facts are concerning when it
comes to pairing regardless of where you personally lie on the spectrum.

Pairing lets the loud idea win. Which might be the correct idea, or ... it might
not be. Why leave it to chance? In a pairing situation a quieter, more
introverted or anxious person is far less likely to push their idea forward.
Pairing usually ensures that the more extroverted -- or even just more engaged
-- person's idea to be the one that gets implemented. 

You can solve this particular problem by only hiring extroverted people. It's a
bit of a sledgehammer solution though, and requires you to willingly deny 1/3 of
the population and probably leave behind some bright people.

##Other Pairing Problems

Leaving behind the whole introversion/extroversion arguments, there are problems
with pairing that affect everyone.

Much like group work back in high school, pairing can lead to a situation where
the engagement of the two people are at different levels. One person may
contribute more simply because they are more interested or having a particularly
good day, are more disciplined, whatever it may be. The other person may
contribute less due to being uncomfortable, bored or even internally not
agreeing with the chosen approach. If nothing else, this is costly. A perfectly
good employee is really not doing much.

Coworkers create interesting relationships in all of our lives. Sometimes we
become friends, but often that bond doesn't happen and instead a level of
professional, but distant, respect drives the relationship. Sometimes pairing
can mean working extremely closely -- often for days at a time -- with someone
you are not very comfortable with, or even just don't like. This can lead to
frustration, lower morale and likely lower productivity. Pairing can force
boundaries to be trampled. Can you imagine if Doctors, Lawyers, guitarists were
forced to collaborate on every single decision? They'd rightly complain.

##Pairing is Expensive

In my experience pairing almost always takes more chronological time to complete
a task. Take that value and multiply it by two and that's a pretty large cost to
the company. Sometimes that cost is worth it. Knowledge transfer is very
important in a company, and pairing can be an effective way to pull that off.
Sometimes the extra cost of pairing is worth the benefits that come from it. But
sometimes it isn't. 

Using pairing to promote collaboration is very inefficient too. Code reviews,
pull requests, and simple ad hoc conversations between employees can yield much
more efficient and higher quality collaboration. Not to mention that being in
the zone and really digging deep into a problem space requires quiet and focus.
Something pairing actively takes away from you. The recent backlash against open
offices 

[[[[ get open office backlash links ]]] largely applies to pairing too.

##Pairing is a Tool

In the end that's all it is. Sometimes pairing is great, other times it's costly
and ineffective. The key is to recognize this and utilize pairing intelligently. 

If your company is new to pairing, you need to get familiar with it and find out
for yourself when it's effective. This is no different from any other tool. 
